Create ADR for mapping to OCP versions (#108)
redhat-appstudio/book: ADR/0026-specifying-ocp-targets-for-fbc.md

# 26. Specifying OCP targets for File-based Catalogs

* Date 2023-06-08

## Status

Accepted

## Context

> One of the supported components types within AppStudio are[File-based Catalogs (FBC)].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the supported component types within AppStudio are [File-based Catalogs (FBC)].
```

These catalogs can either be used in isolation with a version of `opm` packaged in the container

> itself or in conjunction with other catalog configurations via a service like the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
itself or in conjunction with other catalog configurations via a service such as
```

[IIB Image Builder]. Red Hat OpenShift is one example of a platform that leverages FBCs for
defining the operator graphs. In order to enable operator support to vary on a version-by-version
basis, Red Hat maintains one catalog per OpenShift version.

In order to support being able to target FBC components to specific versions of Red Hat OpenShift,
AppStudio needs to be able to keep track of the specific targeted version. In addition to the concerns
around releasing FBC components to OpenShift, the version of `opm` used by each version of OpenShift
may differ, so the AppStudio integration process will need to ensure that tests are run using an appropriate
binary version.

## Decision

> All FBC components intending to be released to OCP will be built using a OCP-specific parent image containing

Reviewer: This is the first time OCP is used. Should we describe what is meant by it?

the target version number as a tag. This will result in a `FROM` instruction like

```
# The base image is expected to contain
# /bin/opm (with a serve subcommand) and /bin/grpc_health_probe

> FROM registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-operator-registry:v4.12

Reviewer: is v4.12 added by the build process?
or does the build process use the tag from the line to determine the version?

Author: No, this is from the Dockerfile itself. Buildah uses the information to populate the annotation. I could not find a specific documentation for this feature, but in the [v1.30.0 release notes](https://buildah.io/releases/2023/04/21/Buildah-version-v1.30.0.html), it indicates

> OCI images produced using multi-stage builds, where the final stage is based on an earlier stage, will no longer include an “org.opencontainers.image.base.name” annotation for the base of that earlier stage combined with an “org.opencontainers.image.base.digest” annotation which corresponds to the image produced by that earlier stage, which are two different images. [#4618](https://github.com/containers/buildah/pull/4618)

Indicating that the image references will map only to the final stage of an image build.

Reviewer: That makes sense. Can you please add this statement then:

> Buildah uses the information to populate the annotation

```

Any image build process for the FBC components will need to include an "org.opencontainers.image.base.name"
annotation indicating the pullspec of the base image. This will enable all components to use `skopeo` to inspect
the artifact to retrieve the pullspec

```bash
$ skopeo inspect --raw docker://quay.io/redhat-user-workloads/<...> |
jq
{
  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "config": {
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json",
  [...]
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.base.digest": "[...]",
    "org.opencontainers.image.base.name": "[...]"
  }
}
```

The target Red Hat OpenShift version will then be able to be pulled from the image tag on the

> "org.opencontainers.image.base.name" annotation. If a task within the AppStudio pipeline needs to access

Reviewer: can we maybe show the corresponding  value of the annotation given the example FROM line above for completeness?

Author: That was my intention. I was trying to build the image from RHTAP as a confirmation for the format that would be present but I was unable to get the registry service account configured in my workspace. I will make this change once I have an example.

Reviewer: sounds good. thanks

# 26. Specifying OCP targets for File-based Catalogs

* Date 2023-06-08

## Status

Accepted

## Context

> One of the supported component types within AppStudio are[File-based Catalogs (FBC)].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the supported component types within AppStudio are [File-based Catalogs (FBC)].
```

itself or in conjunction with other catalog configurations via a service such as
[IIB Image Builder]. Red Hat OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) is one example of a platform that
leverages FBCs for defining the operator graphs. In order to enable operator support to vary on a
version-by-version basis, Red Hat maintains one catalog per OpenShift version.

In order to support being able to target FBC components to specific versions of Red Hat OpenShift,
AppStudio needs to be able to keep track of the specific targeted version. In addition to the concerns
around releasing FBC components to OpenShift, the version of `opm` used by each version of OpenShift
may differ, so the AppStudio integration process will need to ensure that tests are run using an appropriate
binary version.

## Decision

All FBC components intending to be released to OCP will be built using a OCP-specific parent image containing
the target version number as a tag. This will result in a `FROM` instruction like

```
# The base image is expected to contain
# /bin/opm (with a serve subcommand) and /bin/grpc_health_probe
FROM registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-operator-registry:v4.12
```

> While the annoation "org.opencontainers.image.base.name" is populated by buildah, any additional image build

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the annotation "org.opencontainers.image.base.name" is populated by buildah, any additional image build
```

image. The annotation will enable all components to use `skopeo` to inspect the artifact to retrieve the pullspec:

```bash
$ skopeo inspect --raw docker://quay.io/hacbs-release-tests/managed-release-team-tenant/sample-fbc-application/sample-fbc-component@sha256:da4bf45ba45b72aa306dc2889572e92bbac43da08de0a0146e2421f506c5517e | jq
{
  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.manifest.v1+json",
  "config": {
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json",
    "digest": "sha256:c83abcfb3af92d9b8ccea573fce6560a90919e77a8024c8269969b7799a2385c",
    "size": 21327
  },
  "layers": [
    [...]
  ],
  "annotations": {
    "org.opencontainers.image.base.digest": "sha256:e5a07eff6865b2761889ee275d9fc940237c90d05d63b00f60350841ecf42df2",
    "org.opencontainers.image.base.name": "registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-operator-registry:v4.12"
  }
}
```

The target Red Hat OpenShift version will then be able to be pulled from the image tag on the
"org.opencontainers.image.base.name" annotation. If a task within the AppStudio pipeline needs to access
an appropriate `opm` binary for performing validation, it can determine the image used and run the binary from

> that container if it is trusted (for example, if it is an image within `registry.redhat.io`), or fail if the

Author: That would be a reasonable policy as well. I think that we "generally trust" images from registry.redhat.io which is why I made it a broad statement as an example. That is just an example and the actual "trust policy" can be different.

> that container if it is trusted (for example, if it is an image within `registry.redhat.io`), or fail if the

Reviewer 3: Would something like this work?
```
If a task within the AppStudio pipeline needs to access
an appropriate `opm` binary for performing validation, it can determine the base image and use the binary from
that container if it is trusted (for example, if it is an image from the `registry.redhat.io/openshift4/ose-operator-registry` repository), or fail if the base image isn't trusted.
```

> that container if it is trusted (for example, if it is an image within `registry.redhat.io`), or fail if the

Author: That works for me as well!
